= Lower Tanana =
== Location ==
Lower Tanana (ISO 639-3: taa) is spoken in interior Alaska, in the village of Minto, 130 miles northwest of Fairbanks.  
  
== Dialects ==
Lower Tanana is the name used for several varieties of the Athabascan language spoken in the middle section of the Tanana River, a tributary of the Yukon.   Krauss (1973, 1979) referred to the language as spoken in Minto, Tolovana, Toklat, Nenana and Wood River as "Central Tanana," as distinguished from "Transitional Tanana," spoken in Chena, Salcha and Goodpaster upriver.   In 2014, the only speakers of Lower Tanana come from Minto.  There are very few speakers of the language, all in the two oldest generations.  Younger people have apprenticed to fluent speakers and are learning the language.  

== Data on this website ==
Data on this website comes from multiple sources.  Documentation of the language of Minto began in the 1960s with Michael Krauss.   Krauss' text collection, archived in the Alaska Native Language Archive, has been transcribed by Krauss and further edited by James Kari, with some material published (e.g. Charlie 1992).   The text collection also provided material incorporated in Kari's manuscript dictionary (Kari 1994).  In turn, material found in Kari's work has been included in Tuttle's (2009) pocket dictionary.   Examples from these sources are used in the database.  Some sentences therefore come from narratives and have been published, either as part of a text collection or as examples in a dictionary.  Many others were elicited by Tuttle during dictionary or other grammatical work.  All these examples have been checked with speakers to determine their appropriateness for sharing on the internet.  If you find a problematic example, please contact Siri at sgtuttle@alaska.edu or by phone (see tab "Contact" for full information.)  

== Sound system and spelling ==
The following description of the Lower Tanana sound system and orthography are adapted from the introduction to Tuttle's (2009) Benhti Kokht'ana Kenaga', Lower Tanana Athabascan Pocket Dictionary.   The orthography shown here is that which was adopted for that publication based on a negotiation between community members and the linguist.   Examples from other sources have been regularized to that orthography.  


== Pronouncing Minto sounds ==
To get further into this writing system, let us now sort the vowel and consonant symbols into three groups.  The first is the group of symbols that are read almost exactly as we do in English.  All these sounds happen to be consonants.  These examples use particular words because English spelling is inconsistent.

b, d, g: like p in spy, t in stay, k in sky

t, k: top, poke

s, h: so, hoe

sh, ch, th: show, chow, think

l, z and y: low, zoo, you

m, n: move, nose

The next group of sounds are those that represent sounds that exist in both languages, but may be spelled with different letters than English readers are used to. These sounds are all vowels.  The English examples again involve particular words, because the English use of these letters is inconsistent.  

o: 	Think of au in caught and o in long.

u 	Think of oo in boot and u in lure.

i: 	Think of i  in machine or ee in steep. 

e: 	Think of e in bet, but also u in but or a in sofa; this vowel changes a lot depending on what it is next to.  

a: 	Think of the first a in language, lag, bag.

w:	 Think of u in put. 

There are no “long” and “short” vowel symbols in the Minto spelling system.  All the vowels except for e and w are stressed, though the strongest stress occurs on the stem of a word, its most meaningful part. In addition, e and w may be stressed if they are found in the right context—followed by a consonant within a syllable, or by another syllable with an e or w in it. 
The third group of sounds includes a number of sounds that are part of the Minto Athabascan language but are not not part of English in the same way.  These sounds include the following: 

Glottal stop, written ’.  In Minto Athabascan,  unlike in English, the glottal stop is a real consonant. This is the sound in the middle of English UH-oh, ‘Oops!’  To make this sound, you close off the air from your lungs with your glottis, which is in your throat.  Often in Minto Athabascan a glottal stop doesn’t sound or feel like a complete closure, and instead it gives a special color to the vowels around it.  

gh, kh:   For kh, think of the way people say Loch, as in Loch Ness Monster.  These consonants can be felt in the same part of the mouth where you say g and k.  It is hard to find an English example for gh, but it sounds like a softer version of kh.  Note that h by itself is pronounced as it is in English.

dl, tl:  Think of fiddler and Atlas.  Sounds like this do happen in English speech, but they have to be between two vowels. In Minto Athabascan these sounds can occur at the beginning or the end of a word.

dz, ts:  Think of bids for dz, and bits for ts, but these sounds are never heard in the same parts of words in English as they are in Benhti Kenaga’. Ts in particular is pronounced more emphatically in Minto than in English.

ł, tl:  The famous “barred L” represents a sound that is similar to (but louder and longer than) the l in English place.  If you place your tongue in position to say a word that starts with l, and instead pronounce h without moving your tongue, you will start to get this sound. Tl also contains the voiceless l-sound, but it begins abruptly, while ł is pronounced with a gradual beginning.  
tth, ddh:  tth is pronounced like the middle of the phrase: get things.  This consonant is voiceless, but its voiced counterpart ddh is pronounced like the middle of the phrase add this.  

The sounds ł, tth, and ddh  are rather quiet, so it is easy to miss them or mistake them for other sounds.  

Some of the consonants of Minto Athabascan also occur glottalized. These are the sounds that are written in a letter combination ending with an apostrophe (tth’, t’, tl’, tr’, ts’, ch’, k’). Since these sounds are very different from any single sound in the English language, they take some time to learn.  However, they are not really difficult. Think of making these sounds with held breath and a sudden release. Some examples to practice with: 
	tth’ok, ‘plate’ 
t’asr ‘charcoal’ 
tl’uł, ‘rope’
	tr’akha, ‘woman’
ch’eyona’ ‘eagle’
	ts’eba ‘spruce’ 
	k’esr, ‘alder’
You will want to work with a speaker of the language to learn these sounds; you can’t do this alone, even if you have multimedia to work with in the classroom.  But it can’t hurt to practice a little first.  
Two sounds in Minto, nh and yh, are usually  found only at the ends of words. These sounds are not consonant clusters, but voiceless versions of n and y. This means that they sound a bit as if you were whispering.  Sometimes these letter combinations are found inside words, as well.  However, they can never begin a word.  

== Tone marks, apostrophes, hyphens, and intonation ==

Like many languages in the world, Minto Athabascan is a tone language.  This means that words, and parts of words, can be marked with a particular pitch—low or high.  The melodies that come from the combination of pitches are part of the language.   
Many of the  pitches that do not come from tone come from the same source that pitches do in English – what is called intonation.   

The low word-tones in Minto are not always pronounced low, but they are part of the pattern of the language.  Knowing the right word-tone in Minto Athabascan is important to speaking correctly.    Low word tone has not been written in previous publications, and we do not show it on the website.  However, many low word tones can be predicted.  Low word-tone occurs on nearly all words that end with a glottal stop (spelled with an apostrophe, <’>).    

 In addition, it is heard in words and parts of words that had a glottal stop or glottalized consonant in the past, but where those consonants are pronounced differently now.  

High word-tone occurs on just a few words, and one suffix. Low word-tone is not marked in this version of the dictionary. 

The acute accent mark (the accent mark that points forward) is used in just a few words, and one grammatical marker. This mark means “pronounce the vowel with a high-rising pitch, and through your nose.”  You might wonder whether the rule about pitch going down at the end of the sentence will conflict with the √ accent;  usually it will not.  You will still hear and pronounce the high-rising tone even at the end of a sentence.  

Two of the words are listed below, with the funny check mark above the accent  to illustrate the tone, which is high and rising.

 
	  √
	Yá’    ‘only’

	→√
	Ikhú    ‘in vain’

This mark is also used on a suffix, a marker that is placed at the end of a verb to show that it is negative (that is, the English translation would include the word not.)



	 ↓     ↓   →   →  √
	Nudhadhełtth’oná 
	‘He did not hear you.’  

In just two words in this book (dęyh ‘spring’ and ęhę’ ‘yes’) there is a hook under the vowel to indicate that the vowel should be pronounced through the nose, but not with high-rising tone.  Both these words have low tone, because they end with glottal stop.  This is why they cannot be spelled using the acute accent mark, as in yá’ ‘only’; this mark is reserved for vowels that are pronounced through the nose with a high-rising tone.

A hyphen is used in certain words to make clear that a sequence of letters is to be read separately and not as a letter combination.  A frequent example is the word for ‘look,’ which has a stem (-’anh) that begins with a glottal stop.  If the word 

khwnetł-’anh ‘I am looking’

were spelled without the hyphen,  it could look as if it contains a letter combination tl’, and it does not.  





== References ==
Charlie, Teddy. 1992. Ode Setl'oghwnh Da': Long After I Am Gone. Transcribed by Michael Krauss. Edited by James Kari. Fairbanks: Alaska Native Language Center.

Kari, James.  1994.  Lower Tanana Athabaskan Dictionary.  Ms., Alaska Native Language Archive

Krauss, Michael. 1973. "Na-Dene."  in Sebeok, Thomas A., Ed., Current Trends in Linguistics, Vol. 10, Linguistics in North America.  The Hague, Paris: Mouton.  (Reprinted: Plenum Press, New York, 1976).  

Krauss, Michael E.  1979. "Na-Dene and Eskimo-Aleut."  in Campbell, Lyle and Marianne Mithun, eds., The Languages of Native North America: An Historical and Comparative Assessment. Austin:  University of Texas Press.  Pp. 803-901.

Tuttle, Siri (ed.). 2009. Behnti Kokht’ana Kenaga’ : Minto Lower Tanana Athabascan Pocket Dictionary. Fairbanks: Alaska Native Language Center.
